MEHLMANMEDICAL 
BIOSTATISTICS REVIEW 
FOR USMLE STEP 1, 2CK, 3 
BIOSTATISTICS QUESTIONS 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
1. 62-year-old male comes to the office for a check-up. He has no significant past medical history 
and currently feels fine. Last year his wife was diagnosed with adenocarcinoma of the colon. He 
is interested in the screening programs for colon cancer. Which of the following features of a 
test makes it valuable as a screening tool: 
a) high specificity 
b) high positive predictive value 
c) high sensitivity 
d) high accuracy 
e) high precision 
The correct answer is c. 
The idea behind screening is to identify early cases of a disease. In order for a test to be a 
valuable screening test it needs to identify almost all individuals affected by a condition. As 
such, it is important that screening tests have the lowest possible false negative rate. The false 
positive rate is of lesser concern as individuals identified by screening tests can be further 
assessed by tests with higher specificity to confirm the diagnosis. Positive and negative 
predicted value tell us what proportion of positive and negative tests are true 
positives/negatives. Accurate tests are the ones that produce results that are close to the real 
value, while precise tests produce results that are close to each other. 
2. A large medical center has developed a biomarker that can be used for ALS screening. They 
decide to offer the test to all patients aged over 50. Subsequently, they determine that following 
the introduction of the test, survival of ALS patients has increased by approximately two 
months. Which of the following is a possible explanation of the finding: 
a) selection bias 
b) measurement bias 
c) length-time bias 
d) lead-time bias 
e) confounding 
The correct answer is d. 
Lead-time bias refers to apparent survival increase due to earlier disease detection without any 
change in disease course. ALS is an incurable disease with very limited treatment options. Early 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 2 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
treatment would be unlikely to alter the disease course. Selection bias refers to nonrandom 
sampling of study participants. Measurement bias would be present if there was an issue with 
the way a variable was measured (eg, faulty equipment). Length-time bias refers to the 
tendency of screening tests to detect diseases with longer latency periods (eg, the window in 
which a slowly-progressive lymphoma that may have a latency period of a many years can be 
diagnosed is far larger than the one for rapidly-progressive lymphomas). Confounders are 
external variables that may affect the outcome. For example, if heroin users were more likely to 
be alcoholics, it could be determined that alcoholic liver disease is more common among heroin 
users and lead to the conclusion that heroin causes alcoholic liver disease. 
3. 62-year-old female with history of hypertension presents to her primary care physician’s office 
to discuss her blood pressure management. For the past week, she has kept a blood pressure 
diary by measuring it at the same time each day. Her systolic blood pressure measurements (in 
mmHg) were: 145, 129, 140, 129, 129, 132, 145. Which of the following values represents her 
median systolic blood pressure over the past week: 
a) 145 
b) 132 
c) 140 
d) 136 
e) 129 
The correct answer is b. 
The median measurement is the one that has an equal number of measurements greater and 
lesser than it. In this case it is 132 as 3 of the measurements were 129, which is lower than 132 
and 3 measurements were 136, 140 and 145 all of which are larger than 132. In case there is an 
even number of measurements, the median is the average of the two middle values. The mode is 
the most frequently encountered value, which in this case is 129. The mean value is the sum of 
all the measured values divided by the number of measurements: 
(145+129+140+129+129+132+145)/7=136. 
4. A case-control study examining the relationship between alcohol use and pancreatitis 
development generated the following data: 
Alcohol users who developed pancreatitis: 60; alcohol users who did not develop pancreatitis 
30, alcohol non-users who developed pancreatitis: 40; alcohol non-users who did not develop 
pancreatitis: 70. Which of the following represents the way odds ratio is calculated: 
a) (60*40)/(70*30) 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 3 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
b) (60*30)/(70*40) 
c) (60*70)/(40*30) 
d) (60*70)/(60*30*40*70) 
e) cannot be determined 
The correct answer is c. 
The odds ratio represents the odds that a person affected by a condition was exposed to a risk 
factor (odds 1) versus the odds that a person unaffected by the same condition was exposed to 
the same risk factor (odds 2). It is calculated as odds 1/odds 2. Odds 1 = 60/40; odds 2 = 30/70. 
A simple calculation gives us the OR = (60*70)/(40*30). 
5. An epidemiology graduate student has chosen to write her PhD thesis in epidemiology on the 
topic of disease prevalence and incidence. For the purposes of the study, she is required to pick 
a disease with an approximately equal prevalence and incidence. Which of the following 
diseases best satisfies the requirement: 
a) Streptococcal pharyngitis 
b) Aortic stenosis 
c) HIV 
d) Schizophrenia 
e) Carpal tunnel syndrome 
The correct answer is a. 
Disease prevalence refers to the number of people affected by the condition, while disease 
incidence refers to the number of newly diagnosed cases. Therefore, in order for those two 
values to be close to each other, it is essential that the disease duration is short. Almost all 
patients recover from Streptococcal pharyngitis in the same year they develop the disease, 
making the prevalence and incidence very closely aligned. Schizophrenia, carpal tunnel 
syndrome, aortic stenosis and HIV are all chronic conditions and once patients are diagnosed 
they generally remain affected for life (unless, for example, carpal tunnel syndrome is treated 
surgically). While incidence of those conditions may remain stable, with each passing year, the 
prevalence of the disease increases as previously diagnosed patients remain affected and new 
cases are diagnosed. 
6. 68-year-old female has been diagnosed with pneumonia caused by the newly described 
coronavirus. Having watched the news, she is extremely worried about dying from the disease 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 4 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
and asks the physician how likely she is to survive the disease. Which of the following terms is 
she most interested in: 
a) number needed to treat 
b) number needed to harm 
c) attributable risk 
d) case fatality rate 
e) relative risk 
The correct answer is d. 
Case fatality rate is the percentage of patients who die from the disease among those who have 
been affected. Considering that the patient wants to know how likely she is to survive the 
condition, the most valuable piece of information is the percentage of patients affected who end 
up dying, which is the case fatality rate. Relative risk is the risk of developing a disease among 
patients exposed to a risk factor divided by the risk in the unexposed (eg, it tells us that smokers 
are a certain number of times more likely to develop lung cancer compared to non-smokers). 
Attributable risk is the difference in risk between the two groups. Number needed to treat and 
number needed to harm refer to the number of patients who need to receive an intervention in 
order for 1 patient to be helped or harmed. 
7. The investigators are planning a decade-long research project on the association between 
chronic kidney disease (CKD) and long-term NSAID use. The participants have been divided 
into two groups based on whether they are on chronic NSAID therapy. They will be followed 
for CKD development over the next ten years. This study can best be described as: 
a) Prospective cohort study 
b) Retrospective cohort study 
c) Case-control study 
d) Cross-sectional study 
e) Clinical trial 
The correct answer is a. 
The project described is a textbook example of a prospective cohort study, where participants 
are divided into two groups based on their exposure to the risk factor and then followed for a 
period of time for development of an effect. In this case, the ultimate goal will be to determine 
the relative risk of CKD development in patients taking NSAIDs. Retrospective cohort studies 
are similar but their starting point is in the past. Their major advantage over prospective studies 
is the significantly shorter timeframe required to complete the study. Clinical trials require an 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 5 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
active intervention (eg, if NSAIDs were actively prescribed to protect from CKD, rather than 
given as a treatment for another condition). Neither cross-sectional nor case-control studies 
involve following participants for a period of time. 
8. In a case control study, 200 patients with lung cancer were compared to 200 controls. They 
were asked about their smoking habits. The calculated odds ratio was 5.5; the 95% confidence 
interval was 3.2 to 7.8 for this association. Which of the following is the correct interpretation 
of these results: 
a) there is a 95% chance that the odds ratio is 5.5 and 5% chance that it is between 3.2 and 7.8 
b) at least 5% of smokers develop lung cancer 
c) 5% of smokers account for 7.8% of newly diagnosed lung cancers 
d) there is a 95% chance that the true value of the odds ratio is between 3.2 and 7.8 
e) there is on average a 5.5% increased risk for lung cancer among smokers 
The correct answer is d. 
The confidence interval represents an interval where the true value most likely falls. There is a 
95% chance that the true value falls within the 95% confidence interval. In order for results to 
be statistically significant, it is essential that it does not contain the value 1. In this case, the 
results are statistically significant and there is a 95% chance that the true odds ratio falls 
between 3.2 and 7.8. 
9. Researchers are looking for new biomarkers that can aid in diagnosing congestive heart failure 
(CHF) in the areas with a shortage of cardiologists, where obtaining echocardiograms may be 
difficult. They have identified five different molecules and named them CHF1, CHF2, CHF3, 
CHF4, and CHF5. Their sensitivities and specificities were compared to findings on 
echocardiography, which is considered the gold standard. Which of the biomarkers would be 
the most useful to confirm the diagnosis of CHF: 
a) CHF1 - sensitivity: 67%, specificity 72% 
b) CHF2 - sensitivity 95%, specificity 56% 
c) CHF3 - sensitivity 81%, specificity 81% 
d) CHF4 - sensitivity 50%, specificity 89% 
e) CHF5 - sensitivity 58%, specificity 93% 
The correct answer is e. 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 6 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
The higher the specificity of the test, the better the test is for confirming the diagnosis. In 
contrast, the higher the sensitivity of the test, the better it is as a screening test. The goal of 
screening is to identify all patients with the condition, even at the expense of getting a number 
of false positive results. Confirmatory tests, on the other hand, are best when the rate of false
positives is as low as possible, meaning that the patients who test positive very likely have the 
disease. 
10. 25-year-old male presents to the office with fever and sore throat for the past 3 days. His past 
medical history is insignificant. The physician performs an exam and concludes that 
streptococcal pharyngitis is the most likely explanation of the patient’s symptoms. To confirm 
the diagnosis, he decides to use a novel test which has a positive predictive value of 87%. The 
patient tests positive. Which of the following best explains the meaning of this finding: 
a) there is a 13% chance the patient has the disease 
b) there is a 13% chance the patient does not have the disease 
c) the test is 87% accurate in diagnosing the disease 
d) the test is 87% specific for the disease 
e) the test is 87% sensitive for the disease 
The correct answer is b. 
The positive predictive value of a test is a probability that a person who tests positive indeed 
has the condition. The test the physician in question used reportedly has a positive predictive 
value of 87%, meaning there is an 87% chance that the patient who tested positive has the 
disease. That, in turn, means that there is a 13% chance that he does not have the disease. 
Accuracy of the test refers to the tests ability to yield results that are close to the real value. 
Sensitivity of the test is the probability that the test is positive when the disease is present, while 
the specificity is the probability that the test is negative when the disease is absent. 
11. A health department of a small island nation with a steady population and almost no migration 
is writing the annual report on type II diabetes in the community. There are 12,000 people 
living on the island, with 1,800 of them currently affected by the disease. 100 of them were 
diagnosed in the previous year. In the same year 80 patients with diabetes passed away. Which 
of the following is the prevalence of the disease in the population: 
a) 100/1,800 
b) 100/12,000 
c) 1,800/12,000 
d) 20/1,800 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 7 
e) 100/10,200 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
The correct answer is c. 
The prevalence of a disease in the population tells us the percentage of the population that is 
affected by a condition. It is calculating by dividing the number of existing cases with the total 
number of people in the population. In this population 1,800 out of 12,000 people have type II 
diabetes. Therefore, the prevalence of the disease is 1,800/12,000. The incidence of the disease 
looks at the number of new cases (in this case 100) and is calculated by dividing that number by 
the number of people at risk. The fact that 100 new cases of the disease were diagnosed and that 
only 80 patients passed away means that the prevalence of the disease is increasing even with a 
steady incidence, which is typical of many chronic diseases. 
12. A medical student is writing his first research paper. He is interested in finding out whether 
there is an association between acute pancreatitis and paracetamol use. He will be doing a 
retrospective cohort study and has already identified the patients that will be enrolled in the 
study. Which of the following is the correct null hypothesis for his study: 
a) There is a statistically significant association between acute pancreatitis and paracetamol use 
b) Paracetamol use leads to acute pancreatitis 
c) Acute pancreatitis leads to increased paracetamol use 
d) There is no association between paracetamol use and acute pancreatitis 
e) Paracetamol use protects from acute pancreatitis 
The correct answer is d. 
The null hypothesis is the hypothesis of no relationship. The alternative hypothesis is the 
hypothesis of some relationship. The null hypothesis is defined prior to the beginning of the 
study. The study then tests it and concludes with it being either accepted or rejected. In this 
case, the null hypothesis is that there is no association between paracetamol use and acute 
pancreatitis. The alternative hypothesis is that there is a statistically significant association 
between acute pancreatitis and paracetamol use. If the study finds that there is a statistically 
significant association between the two, the null hypothesis is rejected. If the study finds that 
there is no statistically significant association between the two, the null hypothesis is accepted. 
13. 64-year-old male presents to the office for his annual diabetes check-up. His past medical 
history is significant for type II diabetes, hypertension and hypercholesterolemia. He currently 
feels fine. Over the past week, he has been regularly checking his blood pressure levels. His 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 8 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
early morning readings were as follows (in mg/dL): 105, 108, 103, 99, 111, 108, 110. Which of 
the following is the mode of the readings: 
a) 99 
b) 105 
c) 106 
d) 108 
e) 111 
The correct answer is d. 
Mode refers to the most commonly encountered value. In this case only 108 shows up twice 
and, therefore, it is the mode. The average is approximately 106 (sum of the values divided by 
the number of measurements). The median is the value that falls in the middle of all the 
measurements, meaning that there is an equal number of measurements greater than, and lesser 
than the median. 
14. A new drug for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease was developed. It was shown that it 
increases the average survival by approximately 2 years. If it became the new standard of care, 
which of the following changes in prevalence and incidence of Alzheimer’s disease would be 
expected: 
a) incidence will not change, prevalence will not change 
b) incidence will increase, prevalence will increase 
c) incidence will increase, prevalence will not change 
d) incidence will not change, prevalence will increase 
e) incidence will decrease, prevalence will not change 
The correct answer is d. 
Increased survival would lead to the increased prevalence of the disease since prevalence refers 
to the total number of people affected by a condition divided by the total population. As people 
affected by the disease live longer and new cases are being diagnosed, the total number of 
people with the condition increases. Incidence refers to the number of newly diagnosed cases 
and would, therefore, not be affected by a improved management. 
15. A new biomarker for COPD, PD1 has been discovered in a large academic hospital. Upon 
further investigation, it is discovered that among all individuals in the population, the values of 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 9 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
PD1 are normally distributed, with the mean of 100 mg/dL and SD of 20 mg/dL. Patients with 
PD1 values less than 60 mg/dL are considered to have tested positive and are likely to be 
affected by COPD. What percentage of the population would test positive in that scenario: 
a) <1% 
b) 2.5% 
c) 5% 
d) 16% 
e) 32% 
The correct answer is b. 
PD values of 60 mg/dL correspond to 2 SDs below the mean (100-20*2). In normal 
distribution, approximately 68% of measurements fall within 1 SD of the mean. Therefore, 
around 16% fall outside of 1 SD from the mean on each side of the curve (32% in total). 95% of 
measurements fall within 2 SDs of the mean, which means that approximately 2.5% fall under 2 
SDs below the mean. 99.7% of measurements fall within 3 SDs. 
16. Researchers are investigating the association between smoking and mantle cell lymphoma, a 
rare but deadly form of lymphoma. At the end of the study they determine that the relative risk 
of developing mantle cell lymphoma in smokers over a 10 year period is 1.12 with the 95% 
confidence interval: 0.98-1.18. Which of the following conclusions is correct: 
a) no significant association was found 
b) smoking increases the risk of mantle cell lymphoma development 
c) smoking decreases the risk of mantle cell lymphoma development 
d) a confounder is present 
e) in some patients smoking increases, while in others it decreases the risk of mantle cell 
lymphoma development 
The correct answer is a. 
The 95% confidence interval is an interval within which 95% of the time the real value would 
fall. If the RR equals 1, no association between variables exists. In order for results to be 
considered statistically significant, the confidence interval must not contain the number 1 (as it 
implies no correlation). In this case, the 95% confidence interval is between 0.98 (small 
decrease in risk) and 1.18 (increased risk) - therefore, 1 falls within. A confounder is an external 
variable that is related to both the cause and effect and affects the results of the study (eg, if the 
smokers are more likely to also consume alcohol, it could be falsely concluded that smoking 
causes alcoholic fatty liver disease). 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 10 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
17. A group of researchers is looking into developing a treatment protocol for carcinoma of the 
gallbladder, a rare type of tumor that usually affects the elderly. They are primarily interested in 
which chemotherapy regimens have led to increased survival. The clinic they work at rarely 
sees more than 2 gallbladder cancer patients per year. Which of the following types of study 
would be most suitable under the circumstances: 
a) clinical trial 
b) meta-analysis 
c) case report 
d) cohort study 
e) biased study 
The correct answer is b. 
Meta-analysis is a study done by pooling summary data from multiple different studies (which 
have to satisfy the inclusion/exclusion criteria of the study) and doing a statistical analysis of 
them in order to get more precise results. They are mainly useful for rare conditions where it 
would be impossible to find a sufficient number of patients for other forms of study. (Eg, 
imagine there are 10 cases per center. If we pool data from 20 different centers, the total 
number of cases becomes 200, rather than 10). Case reports only report on a single case. Cohort 
studies refer to studies done by comparing the incidence of an effect between a group of 
patients exposed and a group unexposed to a risk factor. Biased studies are those where due to 
an error in the way data was obtained or interpreted, the results of the study do not correspond 
to the actual values. 
18. A study was done to compare the effectiveness of the new diagnostic test for asthma to the 
current gold standard. 100 patients with confirmed asthma undergo the new test and 56 of them 
test positive. The same test is done on 100 patients who are confirmed not to have asthma and 
12 of them receive a positive result. Which of the following represents the positive predictive 
value of the test: 
a) 56% 
b) 67% 
c) 82% 
d) 88% 
e) cannot be determined 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 11 
The correct answer is c. 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
Positive predictive value is the probability that the person who tests positive has the condition 
in question. In this case, there were 56 true positives (people with the disease who tested 
positive) and 12 false positives (people who do not have the condition who tested positive). The 
positive predictive value is calculated as TP/(TP+FP) = 56/(56+12) = 0.82, or 82%. The 
negative predictive value of the test is the probability that the person who tests negative actually 
does not have the disease. In this case, there were 88 true negatives (people without asthma who 
tested negative) and 44 false positives (people who do not have asthma but tested positive). The 
negative predictive value is calculated as TN/(TN+FN) = 88/(44+88) = 0.67, or 67%. 
Sensitivity of the test is the probability that when the disease is present, the patient will test 
positive. It is calculated as TP/(TP+FN) = 56/100 = 0.56, or 56%. Specificity is the probability 
that when the disease is absent, the patient will test negative. It is calculated as TN/(TN+FP) = 
88/100 = 0.88, or 88%. 
19. Which of the following is the negative predictive value of the test: 
a) 56% 
b) 67% 
c) 82% 
d) 88% 
e) cannot be determined 
The correct answer is b. 
The negative predictive value of the test is the probability that the person who tests negative 
actually does not have the disease. In this case, there were 88 true negatives (people without 
asthma who tested negative) and 44 false positives (people who do not have asthma but tested 
positive). The negative predictive value is calculated as TN/(TN+FN) = 88/(44+88) = 0.67, or 
67%. Positive predictive value is the probability that the person who tests positive has the 
condition in question. In this case, there were 56 true positives (people with the disease who 
tested positive) and 12 false positives (people who do not have the condition who tested 
positive). The positive predictive value is calculated as TP/(TP+FP) = 56/(56+12) = 0.82, or 
82%. Sensitivity of the test is the probability that when the disease is present, the patient will 
test positive. It is calculated as TP/(TP+FN) = 56/100 = 0.56, or 56%. Specificity is the 
probability that when the disease is absent, the patient will test negative. It is calculated as 
TN/(TN+FP) = 88/100 = 0.88, or 88%. 
20. Which of the following is the sensitivity of the test: 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 12 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
a) 56% 
b) 67% 
c) 82% 
d) 88% 
e) cannot be determined 
The correct answer is a. 
Sensitivity of the test is the probability that when the disease is present, the patient will test 
positive. It is calculated as TP/(TP+FN) = 56/100 = 0.56, or 56%. Specificity is the probability 
that when the disease is absent, the patient will test negative. It is calculated as TN/(TN+FP) = 
88/100 = 0.88, or 88%. Positive predictive value is the probability that the person who tests 
positive has the condition in question. In this case, there were 56 true positives (people with the 
disease who tested positive) and 12 false positives (people who do not have the condition who 
tested positive). The positive predictive value is calculated as TP/(TP+FP) = 56/(56+12) = 0.82, 
or 82%. The negative predictive value of the test is the probability that the person who tests 
negative actually does not have the disease. In this case, there were 88 true negatives (people 
without asthma who tested negative) and 44 false positives (people who do not have asthma but 
tested positive). The negative predictive value is calculated as TN/(TN+FN) = 88/(44+88) = 
0.67, or 67%. 
21. A study is done to assess the relationship between analgesic use and congestive heart failure 
(CHF) development. 1000 cases of CHF and 1000 controls of similar age, gender and social 
status are identified. They are asked to fill a survey detailing their history of analgesic use. The 
researchers conclude that CHF development is closely related with increased analgesic use, 
with an odds ratio approaching 3. Which of the following needs to be addressed before 
concluding that such an association exists: 
a) selection bias 
b) recall bias 
c) observer bias 
d) lead-time bias 
e) measurement bias 
The correct answer is b. 
The study is done by asking patients to fill a survey. Such studies are prone to what is known as 
recall bias. Patients affected by a condition are often much more likely to remember specific 
instances of exposure to a risk factor and overreport it compared to controls. Selection bias 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 13 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
would imply improper selection of study participants. The fact that controls of similar age, 
gender and social status were selected makes such bias unlikely. Confounders are external 
variables related to both the risk factor and the effect, which significantly change the findings in 
the study. Measurement bias happens due to faulty equipment or inappropriate data collection 
methods. If the researcher’s conclusions were altered by their own beliefs (eg, a researcher who 
strongly believed that an association existed would be more likely to document findings that 
suggest an association), that would be considered observer bias. 
22. A new study was developed to confirm the diagnosis of Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Lymph node 
biopsy is considered the gold standard for diagnosing Hodgin’s lymphoma. 1000 patients were 
tested by the new method before the biopsy was obtained. The following results were obtained: 
432 patients tested positive on both the new study and the biopsy. 68 patients tested negative on 
the new test but were found to be affected after the biopsy was performed. 382 patients tested 
negative both times. 118 patients tested positive on the new test but their biopsy results were 
negative. What was the number of false positives in the study: 
a) 432 
b) 68 
c) 382 
d) 118 
e) 500 
The correct answer is d. 
The number of false positives is the number of people who tested positive on the new test but 
were later determined not to have the disease. In this case, the number is 118. 382 is the number 
of true negatives - people who tested negative and were later confirmed to be negative. There 
were 432 true positives - people who tested positive and were confirmed to be affected. 68 was 
the number of false negatives - people who tested negative but were later found to have the 
disease. 500 was the total number of patients affected and the total number of patients who were 
not affected in this study. 
23. What is the sensitivity of the previously mentioned test: 
a) 86% 
b) 76% 
c) 79% 
d) 85% 
e) 100% 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 14 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
The correct answer is a. 
The sensitivity of the test is calculated as TP/(TP+FN), in this case 86%. The specificity is 
calculated as TN/(TN+FP), in this case 76%. The positive predictive value is calculated as    
TP/(TP+FP), in this case 79%. The negative predictive value is calculated as TN/(TN+FN), in 
this case 85% 
24. Which of the following conclusions can be reached about the new test: 
a) It is as specific as the biopsy. 
b) Most people who test positive do not have the disease. 
c) It identifies the majority of people with Hodgkin’s lymphoma. 
d) 85% of people test negative. 
e) It should replace the lymph node biopsy as the test of choice. 
The correct answer is c. 
The test has the sensitivity of 86%, which means that it is able to identify the majority of people 
who have the condition. With the specificity of the test at 76% it is not as specific as the biopsy. 
PPV of 79% means that the majority of people who test positive do have the disease. The 
numbers that we calculated do not tell us anything about whether the test should be used to 
replace the biopsy and in which circumstances. Those decisions are more complex and involve 
clinical, rather than purely statistical reasoning. The test does not tell us that 85% of people test 
negative. If the entire population were tested, the number of people who test negative would 
likely be far higher than 85% as relatively few people have Hodgkin’s lymphoma. 
25. A medical student is researching risk factors for bladder cancer. While reading the currently 
available literature he notices an unexpected trend - people who sit more and watch more TV 
seemed to be at an increased risk of bladder cancer. Which of the following is the best 
explanation of such findings: 
a) inactivity leads to urinary stasis and consequently carcinoma 
b) observer bias 
c) measurement bias 
d) people who watch more TV are more likely to report symptoms 
e) smoking is a possible confounder 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 15 
The correct answer is e. 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
Smoking is a known risk factor for bladder cancer. Confounders are variables related to both 
the risk factors and the disease that is being studied, which change the real association between 
the two. In this case, if people who sit more and watch more TV are also more likely to smoke, 
it could give the wrong impression that watching TV is associated with bladder cancer. 
Observer bias would be the explanation if the student’s strong belief in the existence of an 
association was affecting the way he was analyzing data. There is no evidence of that. 
Measurement bias refers to faulty measurements leading to incorrect conclusions (eg, due to 
faulty equipment). 
26. A 75-year-old male is being considered for the operative management of severe knee 
osteoarthritis. During the appointment, he expresses serious concern about the possibility of 
developing severe bleeding during the procedure. The available data suggests that 20% of 
patients develop significant bleeding during the procedure. Of those who do develop significant 
bleeding, 5% are considered serious. Which of the following best represents the patient’s risk of 
developing severe bleeding: 
a) 1/1,000 
b) 2/1,000 
c) 5/1,000 
d) 1/100 
e) 5/100 
The correct answer is d. 
20% of patients develop significant bleeding. Of them, 5% develop serious bleeding. 5% of 
20% is 1%. Alternatively, if we assume that 1,000 patients have undergone the procedure, we 
can conclude that 200 of them (20%) developed significant bleeding. 5% of those patients 
developed severe bleeding. 5% of 200 patients is 10 patients. Overall, 10 out of 1000 patients 
(or 1/100) developed severe bleeding. 
27. 63-year-old man presents to the office following the incidental discovery of an elevated PSA 
level on routine blood tests. The physician explains to him the need to obtain further testing, 
including a prostate biopsy. Which of the following features of the prostate biopsy makes it an 
ideal test to definitely confirm the diagnosis: 
a) it is painless 
b) it is highly sensitive 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 16 
c) it is highly specific 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
d) complications from the procedure are rare 
e) it is highly precise 
The correct answer is c. 
Specificity of the test refers to the probability that the test is negative when the disease is 
absent. Highly specific tests, therefore, have low false-positive rates. People who test positive 
can be considered affected by the condition. On the other hand, highly sensitive tests are used 
for screening as their main feature is the high probability that when the disease is present, the 
test will be positive (even at the expense of some false positive results). Highly precise tests 
produce results that are similar to each other. While clinical features of a test are taken into 
consideration when deciding to order it, they do not directly tell us how good a test is for either 
screening or disease confirmation. Furthermore, as far as diagnostic tests go, biopsies are 
neither among the least painful nor the least likely to cause complications. 
28. A large clinical trial to compare the efficacy of a novel antihypertensive to that of ACE 
inhibitors is performed. Which of the following corresponds to the first phase of testing a new 
drug: 
a) post-marketing surveillance 
b) patients randomly assigned to the new drug or lisinopril 
c) treating hypertension with the new drug on a small number of patients 
d) small number of healthy volunteers given the new drug 
e) animal studies 
The correct answer is d. 
Phase I of clinical trials refers to the phase where small numbers of healthy volunteers or 
patients are given the target drug. In the second phase, a somewhat larger number of patients is 
given the drug. In phase III researchers actively compare the target drug to placebo or the 
currently accepted gold standard treatment. Phase IV refers to surveillance after the treatment is 
approved in order to detect rare or long-term adverse effects which can lead to the drug being 
withdrawn from the market. 
29. A 55-year-old female presents to the clinic for her regular mammography screening test. She 
feels fine and has no current complaints. Her family history is non-contributory. The test result 
comes back negative. The physician explains the meaning of the negative test and the likelihood 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 17 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
that she is indeed healthy. Which of the following features of a test depend on the prevalence of 
the disease in the population: 
a) sensitivity and specificity 
b) positive and negative predictive values 
c) sensitivity and positive predictive value 
d) specificity and accuracy 
e) precision and negative predictive value 
The correct answer is b. 
The positive and negative predictive values of a test refer to the likelihood that people who test 
positive or negative are indeed positive or negative. Sensitivity and specificity tell us what the 
probability is that people who are positive or negative for the disease test positive or negative, 
respectively. Alongside accuracy and precision, they are inherent features of each individual 
test. PPV and NPV, on the other hand, depend on the prevalence of the disease in the 
population. Compare hypertension and silicosis for example. Considering how significantly 
more common hypertension is compared to silicosis, regardless of how people test for either 
condition, the likelihood that they are affected by hypertension is far higher. Therefore, the 
likelihood that those who test positive are affected is also higher. 
30. A group of researchers is assessing the risk of developing myocardial infarction in a group of 
high-risk patients after switching to a DASH diet. The annual risk of developing a myocardial 
infarction in the group was 10% before the dietary change. In the following year, among those 
who successfully changed their diet, 5% developed myocardial infarctions. Which of the 
following represents absolute risk reduction of DASH diet: 
a) 5% 
b) 10% 
c) 25% 
d) 50% 
e) cannot be determined 
The correct answer is a. 
Absolute risk reduction represents the difference in risk. In this case it is 10%-5%=5%. Relative 
risk reduction, on the other hand, refers to the proportion. In this case, it would be 50% (the risk 
was halved). 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 18 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
31. Which of the following represents the relative risk reduction in the same scenario: 
a) 5% 
b) 10% 
c) 25% 
d) 50% 
e) cannot be determined 
The correct answer is d. 
Relative risk reduction refers to what proportion of the risk has disappeared following the 
intervention. In this case, the risk was halved (from 10% to 5%) so the relative risk reduction is 
50%. Absolute risk reduction represents the difference in risk. In this case it is 10%-5%=5%. 
32. The researchers are considering using the ferritin value as the screening test for gastrointestinal 
malignancies. At the moment they are using the cut-off value of 20 ng/mL and referring 
patients with values lower than that for further testing. After a year, they changed the cut-off 
value to 50 ng/mL. Which of the following best describes the change in sensitivity and 
specificity of the test following such change: 
a) sensitivity increased, specificity decreased 
b) sensitivity unchanged, specificity increased 
c) sensitivity decreased, specificity unchanged 
d) sensitivity unchanged, specificity unchanged 
e) sensitivity decreased, specificity increased 
The correct answer is a. 
If the cut-off value is changed from 20 to 50 mg/dL, more people are going to test positive (as 
everyone with ferritin values between 20 and 50, who would have been considered negative a 
year ago, would be considered positive now). Therefore, the test will be more likely to identify 
the vast majority of cases but those who are identified will be less likely to have the disease. 
Therefore, the sensitivity of the test will increase but the specificity will decrease (the number 
of false negatives will decrease but the number of false positives will increase). 
33. A large cohort study is performed to assess the efficacy of a novel statin in prevention of 
cardiovascular events. At the end of the study it is determined that 12% of patients treated with 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 19 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
older statins suffered a cardiovascular event compared to 8% treated with the new drug. Which 
of the following numbers corresponds to the absolute risk reduction in this study: 
a) 67% 
b) 33% 
c) 4% 
d) 8% 
e) 12% 
The correct answer is c. 
Absolute risk reduction is the difference in risk. In this case the difference is 4% (12%-8%). 
34. In the previously mentioned study, which of the following numbers corresponds to the relative 
risk reduction: 
a) 67% 
b) 33% 
c) 4% 
d) 8% 
e) 12% 
The correct answer is b. 
Relative risk reduction is the proportion of risk reduction. In this case the risk on previous 
treatment was 12%, compared to 8% on the new treatment. That is a 33% risk reduction. 
35. A medical student is working on his first research project. He has decided to analyze a disease 
that frequently affects his patients. For the purposes of the study, he needs to select a disease 
that has similar incidence and prevalence in the population. Which of the following conditions 
best satisfies the requirement: 
a) atrial fibrillation 
b) HIV 
c) type II diabetes mellitus 
d) depression 
e) UTI 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 20 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
The correct answer is e. 
Prevalence refers to the number of people currently affected by the condition, while incidence 
looks at the ratio of the number of new cases to the number of people at risk. Chronic 
conditions generally have prevalences much higher than incidences because each case is 
counted in the incidence statistic only once but remains counted in the prevalence statistic for 
years. Of the conditions in question, only UTI is an acute condition. Since almost all patients 
with UTI recover relatively quickly, they are calculated only once for both prevalence and 
incidence. 
36. A 65-year-old female with past medical history significant for obesity, hypertension, 
hypercholesterolemia and type II diabetes mellitus is taking part in a clinical study assessing the 
effectiveness of a new weight loss drug compared to placebo. Patients are randomly assigned to 
either group and their weight is measured every day for three months. At the end of the study 
period, the results between the groups are compared. Which of the following is the correct null 
hypothesis for the study: 
a) the new drug is more effective than placebo 
b) placebo is more effective than the new drug 
c) there is no significant difference in effectiveness between the new drug and placebo 
d) the new drug causes weight gain 
e) the new drug is associated with significant weight change in either direction 
The correct answer is c. 
The null hypothesis states that no difference exists. The alternative hypothesis states that a 
difference does exist. At the end of the study the null hypothesis is either accepted or rejected 
based on where the confidence interval falls. 
37. In the previously mentioned study, which of the following would be a type II error: 
a) wrongly concluding that the pill is associated with weight loss 
b) wrongly concluding that the pill is not associated with weight loss 
c) wrongly concluding the clinical significance of the findings 
d) wrongly interpreting the results of measurements 
e) failing to address possible biases in the study 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 21 
The correct answer is b. 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
Type II errors refer to failing to reject a wrong null hypothesis. In this case, the null hypothesis 
states that there is no difference in weight loss between treatment and placebo. If the null 
hypothesis is false it means that there is a difference between the treatment and placebo. Failing 
to reject it would mean concluding that no difference exists. Type I errors refer to rejecting a 
correct null hypothesis (eg, concluding that there is a difference between the two groups when 
in fact there is none). 
38. Which of the following could be done to decrease the probability of making a type II error: 
a) rounding up the measurement results to the nearest 10 
b) excluding a number of participants from the study 
c) changing the null hypothesis 
d) increasing the sample size 
e) dividing the treatment group in two 
The correct answer is d. 
Beta is the probability of making a type II error and it is related to the power of the study (1
beta). Type II error refers to rejecting the null hypothesis when it is, in fact, true. Increasing the 
sample size, improving the precision of the measurement and increasing the expected effect size 
would increase the power of the study (and decrease beta). 
39. The patient has also been checking her blood sugar levels daily over the same time period. Her 
blood sugar levels were mostly around 120 mg/dL. However, at one point, she was admitted to 
the hospital severely dehydrated and disoriented. At the time of the admission blood glucose 
was 526 mg/dL. Which of the following best describes the effect this measurement is having on 
the mean, median and mode of her blood glucose levels: 
a) mean < median < mode 
b) median < mean < mode 
c) mean < mode < median 
d) mode < mean < median 
e) mode < median < mean 
The correct answer is e. 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 22 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
A value that differs significantly from the usual measurements affects the measures of central 
tendency to a different degree. Mean is affected the most because in order for it to be 
calculated, we need the sum of all the values that were measured. Median is affected 
significantly less because it only adds one value to the high end and the median is the value that 
falls in the middle of all measurements. The mode is affected the least as it is the most 
frequently measured value. In this case 526 mg/dL is not the most frequently measured value so 
the mode does not change. 
40. A public health department is working on developing a program to decrease both the incidence 
and the prevalence of lung cancer. Which of the following interventions would best achieve that 
goal: 
a) development of new chemotherapeutics 
b) improving specialist referral times 
c) introduction of a smoking cessation program 
d) introduction of a screening program 
e) increasing the number of surgeons 
The correct answer is c. 
If a risk factor (such as smoking) is eliminated it is going to lead to a decreased incidence of the 
disease. The consequence of that is that without any change in the way lung cancer is treated, 
the prevalence of the disease will also go down. Developing new chemotherapeutics, improving 
specialist referral times, introducing screening programs and increasing the number of surgeons 
could all improve patient outcomes but would not alter the incidence of the disease. If those 
measures led to improved survival, the prevalence of the disease could increase. 
41. A study is being done to assess the strength of association between smoking and coronary 
disease development. At the beginning of the study, the patients are divided into two groups 
based on whether they smoke cigarettes on daily basis. They were then followed for 10 years 
for the development of any form of coronary heart disease. At the end of the study period, there 
does not appear to be a significant difference in coronary disease incidence between the two 
groups. Which of the following most likely explains the finding: 
a) smoking is not a risk factor for coronary disease 
b) Berkson bias 
c) observer bias 
d) recall bias 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 23 
e) Hawthorne effect 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
The correct answer is e. 
Hawthorn effect refers to a behavioral change in participants who know they are being 
followed. In this case it is possible that patients who were followed stopped smoking or 
decreased the amount they smoked. Smoking is a known risk factor for coronary disease 
development. Observer bias could explain the finding if the researchers strongly believed that 
there was no association between the two and if such belief affected the way they interpreted 
the results. In this case, the likelihood that the participants simply changed their behavior in 
responds to being followed is higher. Recall bias is a term used to describe the phenomenon 
where people who develop a condition tend to overreport exposure to a risk factor that is being 
studied compared to controls. This study does not depend on the participants’ recall of risk 
factor exposure. Berkson bias refers to the tendency of hospitalized patients to be less healthy 
and have different exposures when compared to the general population. The participants in this 
study were not necessarily hospitalized patients. 
42. A group of researchers is is conducting a study to compare a new anti-diabetic drug with 
metformin. A total of 500 patients were enrolled in a study, 300 received the new drug, while 
200 received metformin. Both groups were followed for 3 months. At the end of the 3-month 
period, the average fasting blood glucose level in the group treated with metformin was 135.5, 
while the average blood glucose level in the group treated with the new drug was 133.9 
(p=0.03). Which of the following represents the best interpretation of those findings: 
a) the new drug resulted in clinically insignificant but statistically significant effect 
b) the new drug resulted in clinically significant but statistically insignificant effect 
c) the new drug resulted in clinically significant and statistically significant effect 
d) the new drug resulted in clinically insignificant and statistically insignificant effect 
e) cannot be determined from the data given 
The correct answer is a. 
The fact that the p value is <0.05 suggests that the new drug has resulted in a statistically 
significant decrease in blood glucose levels. However, the actual clinical value of decreasing 
the fasting blood glucose from 135.5 to 133.9 is unlikely to be significant. 
43. A large study is done to assess the average blood glucose values between patients with different 
chronic conditions. Patients are divided into groups based on what their underlying co
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 24 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
morbidity is and their blood glucose measurements are taken. At the end of the study, the 
researchers want to compare the mean blood glucose levels between the groups. Which of the 
following statistical tests would be the most appropriate: 
a) t-test 
b) ANOVA 
c) Chi-square 
d) Fisher’s exact test 
e) meta-analysis 
The correct answer is b. 
ANOVA test is used to compare the means between the groups. t-test is used to compare the 
means of two groups. Chi-square and Fischer’s exact test are used to check differences between 
categorical outcomes. Meta-analysis is a type of study where data is gathered from a large 
number of previous studies and statistically analyzed in order to get a more precise result. 
44. If the researchers from the previous question wanted to compare blood glucose level between 
healthy subjects and those with any chronic condition and only used the groups: healthy and not 
healthy, which of the following tests would be the most appropriate: 
a) t-test 
b) ANOVA 
c) Chi-square 
d) Fisher’s exact test 
e) meta-analysis 
The correct answer is a. 
t-test is used to compare the means of two groups. ANOVA test is used to compare the means 
between the groups. Chi-square and Fischer’s exact test are used to check differences between 
categorical outcomes. Meta-analysis is a type of study where data is gathered from a large 
number of previous studies and statistically analyzed in order to get a more precise result. 
45. A study was done to determine the incidence and outcomes of myocardial infarction in a large 
urban area. The annual incidence of myocardial infarction was found to be 600 per 100,000 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 25 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
people with the case fatality rate of 15%. Which of the following represents the annual 
mortality from myocardial infarction in this population: 
a) 150/100,000 
b) 1,500/100,000 
c) 900/100,000 
d) 60/100,000 
e) 90/100,000 
The correct answer is e. 
The case fatality rate is the proportion of people affected by a condition who die from it. In this 
population 15% of those who suffer myocardial infarctions die from them. The annual 
incidence of the disease is 600/100,000. Therefore, the mortality from the condition is 15% of 
600/100,000 or 0.15*600/100,000 = 90/100,000. 
46. A resident is pre-rounding the 7 patients under his watch. As part of the check-up he measures 
their heart rates. He measured the following values (per minute): 92, 100, 83, 61, 86, 83, 102. 
Which of the following is the mean heart rate that he measured: 
a) 83 
b) 86 
c) 87 
d) 61 
e) 102 
The correct answer is c. 
The mean is calculated by dividing the sum of all the measurements by the number of 
measurements. In this case the exact result is 86.7, which can be rounded to 87. 61 and 102 are 
the lowest and highest value, respectively. 83 is the mode, or the value that appears most 
frequently. 86 is the median or the value that has an equal number of measurements falling 
above and below it. 
47. What is the median heart rate that the resident measured: 
a) 83 
b) 86 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 26 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
c) 87 
d) 61 
e) 102 
The correct answer is b. 
86 is the median or the value that has an equal number of measurements falling above and 
below it. The mean is calculated by dividing the sum of all the measurements by the number of 
measurements. In this case the exact result is 86.7, which can be rounded to 87. 61 and 102 are 
the lowest and highest value, respectively. 83 is the mode, or the value that appears most 
frequently. 
48. A new ACE inhibitor was developed specifically for slowing the progression of advanced 
diabetic nephropathy over 5 years. In a randomized clinical trial, the rates of ESRD 
development in the group treated with the new drug were 0.03. The odds of ESRD development 
in the group treated with ramipril were 0.12. Which of the following represents the relative risk 
reduction: 
a) 3% 
b) 9% 
c) 12% 
d) 25% 
e) 75% 
The correct answer is e. 
The new drug has decreased the incidence of ESRD from 0.12 to 0.03 (12% to 3%). That 
represents a 75% drop in the number of new cases of ESRD. Relative risk reduction represents 
the proportion of risk reduction, while absolute risk reduction represents the difference in risk. 
49. A large cohort study was done to assess the relationship between smoking and pancreatic 
cancer development. Patients were divided into smokers and non-smokers and followed for 10 
years for pancreatic cancer development. At the end of the study period the relative risk was 
calculated. Which of the following confidence intervals would most clearly suggest that 
smoking significantly increases the risk of pancreatic cancer development: 
a) 0.3-0.8 
b) 0.5-1.1 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 27 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
c) 0.1-3.6 
d) 0.9-2.5 
e) 1.5-1.8 
The correct answer is e. 
In order for the results of a study to be statistically significant, the confidence interval of the 
relative risk must not contain the number 1. RR of 1 implies that there is an equal risk of 
developing the condition between the two groups. As such, for as long as 1 falls within the 
confidence interval, the results cannot be considered statistically significant, regardless of what 
the high and low end of the interval are. RR<1 implies that the factor that was studied was 
protective, while the RR>1 implies that it is a risk factor. In this case, only the 1.5-1.8 
confidence interval clearly shows a statistically significant increase in risk of pancreatic cancer 
development. 
50. Which of the following confidence intervals would indicate that smoking is protective against 
pancreatic cancer: 
a) 0.3-0.8 
b) 0.5-1.1 
c) 0.1-3.6 
d) 0.9-2.5 
e) 1.5-1.8 
The correct answer is a. 
In order for the results of a study to be statistically significant, the confidence interval of the 
relative risk must not contain the number 1. RR of 1 implies that there is an equal risk of 
developing the condition between the two groups. As such, for as long as 1 falls within the 
confidence interval, the results cannot be considered statistically significant, regardless of what 
the high and low end of the interval are. RR<1 implies that the factor that was studied was 
protective, while the RR>1 implies that it is a risk factor. In this case, only the 0.3-0.8 
confidence interval clearly shows a statistically significant decrease in risk of pancreatic cancer 
development. 
51. A clinical trial is done to assess the effectiveness of a new statin drug. Patients are randomly 
divided into two groups. One of the groups is treated with the new drug for 3 months, while the 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 28 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
other is treated with atorvastatin. Neither the participants nor the researchers know who is 
getting the new drug. Such approach best prevents which of the following: 
a) confounding 
b) selection bias 
c) length-time bias 
d) recall bias bias 
e) observer bias 
The correct answer is e. 
Blinding in clinical trials prevents observer bias. If the researchers are aware of which patients 
are receiving the tested drug, there is a chance this knowledge may influence the way they 
interpret the data. Recall bias is a feature of case-control studies and refers to the tendency of 
participants to overreport exposure when the investigated effect develops. Selection bias refers 
to the way participants were selected for the study. Blinding has no effect on it. Length-time 
bias refers to the tendency of screening tests to detect diseases with longer latency periods. 
Confounders are external factors related to both variables being studied which can lead to 
incorrect interpretation of results. 
52. A large clinical institute has developed a new drug for the management of advanced melanoma. 
The early results show the average survival time increasing by two years. For the most part, 
serious side effects were not observed and no participants died from complications of the 
treatment. If such treatment was administered to everyone with advanced melanoma, which of 
the following best describes the effect this would have on melanoma incidence and prevalence: 
a) incidence would increase, prevalence would not change 
b) incidence would not change, prevalence would decrease 
c) incidence would decrease, prevalence would increase 
d) incidence would not change, prevalence would increase 
e) incidence would not change, prevalence would not change 
The correct answer is d. 
Finding a new treatment that improves survival for a condition would increase the prevalence of 
the disease in the society. Prevalence tells us how many people are affected. If people were to 
mostly die within a year from the time they were diagnosed, the prevalence and incidence 
would remain almost the same. However, if people live longer, despite the constant number of 
new cases, the total number of cases (new + old) keeps increasing. The incidence, meanwhile, 
would not change as it refers to the number of new cases that are being diagnosed. The way the 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 29 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
disease is treated does not affect the number of people who develop it. A way to change the 
incidence of the condition would be to change risk factor exposure (eg, incidence would 
decrease if people abstained from spending excessive amounts of time in the sun without 
appropriate protection). 
53. A 60-year-old male presents to the physician’s office after his brother was diagnosed with 
colorectal cancer. His family history is otherwise non-contributory and he is currently in good 
health. The physical exam reveals no abnormalities. The patient undergoes screening 
colonoscopy which comes back negative. The patient is still concerned about the possibility a 
tumor was missed on a colonoscopy. While helping the patient understand the results, which of 
the following features of the test should the physician refer to: 
a) precision 
b) sensitivity 
c) specificity 
d) positive predictive value 
e) negative predictive value 
The correct answer is e. 
The negative predictive value is the probability that the person with a negative test result is 
actually negative for the disease. In this case the patient tested negative and his concern is the 
probability that the test gave him a false negative result. The higher the negative predictive 
value of the test, the more likely it is that the patient is indeed healthy. The positive predictive 
value tells us what the probability is that someone who tests positive has the condition. 
Sensitivity and specificity tell us what percentage of people with or without the condition test 
positive or negative, respectively. Precise tests are the ones that give results that are close to one 
another. 
54. The new definition of hypercholesterolemia has changed and the cut off value was decreased by 
10 mg/dL. Which of the following best describes the effect such change would have on 
incidence and prevalence of hypercholesterolemia: 
a) incidence unchanged, prevalence unchanged 
b) incidence increased, prevalence increased 
c) incidence increased, prevalence decreased 
d) incidence decreased, prevalence decreased 
e) incidence decreased, prevalence decreased 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 30 
The correct answer is b. 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
Changing the definition so that more people would be seen as positive would increase both 
prevalence and incidence of the disease in question - incidence increases as more new cases will 
be diagnosed (due to the lower cut-off value) and prevalence increases as it is a chronic 
condition. 
55. A group of researchers has started developing a new drug for the treatment of Acute Myeloid 
Leukemia. The molecule has been developed in the lab. 10 healthy volunteers will be given the 
drug. Such a scenario corresponds to which of the following phases of clinical trials: 
a) phase I 
b) phase II 
c) phase III 
d) phase IV 
e) phase V 
The correct answer is a. 
There are 4 commonly identified phases of clinical trials. In phase I of the clinical trial a small 
number of healthy volunteers is given a drug to assess its safety, toxicity profile, 
pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics. In phase II a moderate number of patients is treated 
with the drug to assess its efficacy, optimal dosing and common side effects. In phase III a large 
number of patients is randomly assigned to treatment and placebo (or previously used gold 
standard treatment) groups. This phase compares the outcomes of patients given placebo or 
current standard of care to those of patients treated with the new drug. Phase IV refers to post
marketing surveillance to detect rare or long-term adverse effects. 
56. Which of the following best describes what is being assessed in the previous question: 
a) long-term safety of the drug 
b) rare side effects 
c) pharmacokinetics 
d) optimal dosing 
e) comparison with current standard of care 
The correct answer is c. 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 31 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
There are 4 commonly identified phases of clinical trials. In phase I of the clinical trial a small 
number of healthy volunteers is given a drug to assess its safety, toxicity profile, 
pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics. In phase II a moderate number of patients is treated 
with the drug to assess its efficacy, optimal dosing and common side effects. In phase III a large 
number of patients is randomly assigned to treatment and placebo (or previously used gold 
standard treatment) groups. This phase compares the outcomes of patients given placebo or 
current standard of care to those of patients treated with the new drug. Phase IV refers to post
marketing surveillance to detect rare or long-term adverse effects. 
57. It has been determined that the drug is safe. Which of the following would be the most 
appropriate next step for the researchers to take: 
a) release the drug to the market 
b) compare its effect to that of placebo 
c) compare its effect to that of the current standard of care 
d) give it to 30 patients diagnosed with ALS 
e) give it to another 10 healthy volunteers 
The correct answer is d. 
Following the successful completion of phase I of a clinical trial, the drug enters phase II. In 
phase II the drug is given to a number of patients with the disease of interest in order to assess 
efficacy, adverse effects and determine optimal dosing. Comparing the drug to placebo or the 
current standard of care would only occur after that. Releasing the drug to the market is the 
appropriate step once the safety and efficacy of the drug have been proven by comparing it to 
the current standard of care. 
58. Following a large clinical trial the drug has been released to the market. Over the next few years 
it proves to induce remission is a slightly larger percentage of patients. However, there seems to 
be an increasing number of case reports pointing to patients developing seizures when given the 
drug. Which of the following would be the most appropriate response to such situation: 
a) withdraw the drug from the market 
b) change the recommended dosage 
c) change the recommended target patient population 
d) administer it only together with anti-seizure treatment 
e) administer the drug in the ICU 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 32 
The correct answer is a: 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
Post-marketing surveillance refers to following the drug for years after it has been released to 
the market in order to determine less common and more long-term side effects. In this case, it 
appears that seizures are an uncommon but serious side effect. The most appropriate next step 
would be to withdraw the drug from the market until further analysis is done. The effective 
dosage has been determined in earlier phases and decreasing the dosage would likely also affect 
the efficacy of the drug without necessarily eliminating the unwanted side effect. While it may 
be the case that the drug is more damaging to a subset of the population, changing the target 
population without first withdrawing the drug from the market for further testing would not be 
the appropriate action. Adding an anti-seizure drug would increase the risk of other side effects. 
Chemotherapy is not administered in the ICU. 
59. A study is done to assess the effectiveness of a new pain medication in treatment of chronic 
pain. A total of 100 patients were randomly assigned to either the new drug or no additional 
treatment. The participants were recruited from a pain clinic. They are then asked to complete a 
survey 7 days later asking them about their pain levels. A statistically significant improvement 
in pain levels is seen with patients on the new drug. Which of the following is a limitation to the 
validity of this study: 
a) low number of participants 
b) recall bias 
c) recruiting patients from the pain clinic only 
d) lack of blinding 
e) subjective nature of the study 
The correct answer is d. 
Blinding refers to the unawareness of study participants (and/or researchers) as to whether they 
are receiving the treatment or not. In this case, the patients were aware of whether they were 
receiving an additional drug or not. Therefore, it is possible that due to placebo effect, patients 
who were receiving the drug could report significantly lower pain levels compared to those 
receiving no additional treatment. Recall bias refers to the tendency of patients who develop a 
disease to overreport their exposures. Since pain levels are subjective, a survey is a good way to 
evaluate the discomfort patients are experiencing. 
60. A researcher is working on a project to determine the strength of association between smoking 
and bladder cancer development. He has decided to do a retrospective cohort study and has 
identified the appropriate study participants. At the end of the study he calculates the relative 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 33 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
risk and confidence interval. The relative risk is 2.2. Which of the following p values for the 
outcome would suggest that the result is significant: 
a) 0.04 
b) 0.08 
c) 0.10 
d) 0.50 
e) 1.00 
The correct answer is a. 
If the p value is <0.05 for a study outcome, there is less than a 5% chance that the result was 
due to chance alone. For clinical studies, the p value of 0.05 is generally used. Of the answer 
choices, only 0.04 is lower than 0.05. 
61. A case-control study has been conducted to assess the relationship between excessive alcohol 
use and liver cancer development. 100 patients with liver cancer and 100 appropriately matched 
controls were identified. Of the 100 patients, 40 were found to have used excessive amounts of 
alcohol. Of the 100 controls, 15 were found to be using excessive amounts of alcohol. 
Calculating which of the following would be the most appropriate first step: 
a) relative risk 
b) odds ratio 
c) attributable risk 
d) number needed to harm 
e) incidence 
The correct answer is b. 
Odds ratio is typically calculated in case-control studies. It represents the ratio of the odds of 
exposure among cases and the odds of exposure among controls. Relative risk is calculated in 
cohort studies and represents the risk of developing the disease in the exposed and unexposed 
groups. Attributable risk is the difference in risk between the exposed and unexposed group. 
Number needed to harm represents the number of patients who need to be exposed to a risk 
factor for 1 patient to be harmed. Incidence is the ratio of the number of new cases and the total 
number of people at risk. 
62. Which of the following represents the correct way of calculating the odds ratio: 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 34 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
a) 100/40 
b) 40/15 
c) 100/15 
d) 40*85/60*15 
e) (40/100)/(85/100) 
The correct answer is d. 
The odds of exposure among cases are calculated as (exposed affected)/(unexposed affected). 
The odds of exposure among controls are calculated as (exposed unaffected)/(unexposed 
unaffected). The odds ratio is the ratio of the two odds, which equals 40*85/60*15. The choice 
e represents the way relative risk is calculated. RR would be calculated in a cohort study. 
63. Which of the following biases needs to be addressed in this study: 
a) lead-time bias 
b) length-time bias 
c) selection bias 
d) procedure bias 
e) recall bias 
The correct answer is e. 
Recall bias is common in retrospective studies that depend on patients’ recall. In this case, it is 
possible that people diagnosed with liver cancer, aware of their disorder, may overreport their 
alcohol use when compared to unaffected individuals. Lead-time bias refers to the appearance 
of increased survival with early diagnosis that is not due to improved patient outcomes but 
rather purely due to an earlier date of disease detection. Length-time bias refers to the tendency 
of screening studies to better identify diseases with longer latency periods. Selection bias occurs 
due to nonrandom sampling of study subjects. The controls in this case were appropriately 
matched. Procedure bias occurs when subjects are not treated equally. This study was not 
assessing the management at all. 
64. A group of researchers is comparing the efficacy of conservative and operative management of 
acute appendicitis. 500 patients are randomly assigned to one of the two groups - 250 into each 
group. The patients are then followed for 2 years. Which of the following best describes this 
study design: 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 35 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
a) case-control study 
b) cross-sectional study 
c) randomized clinical trial 
d) prospective cohort trial 
e) retrospective cohort trial 
The correct answer is c. 
The study that was described in the question stem is the randomized controlled clinical trial. It 
involves randomly assigning patients to one of two groups of interventions (or treatment versus 
placebo) and comparing the outcomes in the two groups. Cross-sectional studies are done to 
determine the prevalence of the disease. Case-control studies are done to determine the odds 
ratio, which is calculated as the odds of exposure among the affected group divided by the odds 
of exposure among the unaffected group. Both prospective and retrospective cohort studies are 
done to determine the relative risk of developing the disease among the exposed versus the 
unexposed group. In this case the patients randomly received one of two interventions and were 
followed to assess the efficacy and complication rates. 
65. A study is done to assess blood pressure differences between residents of different states. A 
number of participants from each state is selected from the study. The mean blood pressure of 
residents of each state is calculated and the means are then compared. Which of the following 
statistical tests would be the most appropriate for such analysis: 
a) t-test 
b) ANOVA 
c) Fischer’s exact test 
d) Chi-square 
e) meta-analysis 
The correct answer is b. 
ANOVA test is done to compare the means of 3 or more groups. t-test compares the means of 
two groups. Chi-square test checks differences between percentages or proportions of 
categorical outcomes. Fischer’s exact test checks differences between two percentages or 
proportions of categorical outcomes. Meta-analysis is a type of study where data from multiple 
studies is pooled and statistically analyzed to improve the power, strength of evidence and 
generalizability of the findings. 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 36 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
66. A 54-year-old female comes to the office to discuss preventive care. She is told that 
mammography is recommended for all women her age. The patient wants to learn more about 
what makes mammography a good choice of a test for her. In general, which of the following 
traits best fits a good screening test: 
a) low number of false positives 
b) low number of false negatives 
c) high precision 
d) low number needed to treat 
e) low attrition rate 
The correct answer is b. 
The idea behind screening is to identify almost all individuals affected by a condition. The 
number of false positive is of lesser concern in this case as the final diagnosis can be confirmed 
with more specific tests later on. Precision refers to how close to each other the results of the 
same test are. The number needed to treat describes the impact of an intervention or exposure in 
cohort studies. 
67. A retrospective cohort study was done to assess the relationship between long-term ibuprofen 
use and stomach cancer development. The relative risk that was calculated was 1.05 with the 
confidence interval between 0.99 and 1.08. Which of the following represents a correct 
conclusion from the study: 
a) it cannot be concluded that long-term ibuprofen use is associated with stomach cancer 
development 
b) long-term ibuprofen use has a small but clear correlation with stomach cancer development 
c) long-term ibuprofen use is likely to be protective against stomach cancer 
d) in some patients long-term ibuprofen use may decrease, while in others it may increase the 
risk of stomach cancer 
e) there is stronger evidence in favor of long-term ibuprofen use causing stomach cancer than 
not causing it 
The correct answer is a. 
The relative risk of 1 implies that there is no association between long-term ibuprofen use and 
stomach cancer development. In order for results of a clinical study to be considered significant, 
the value 1 must not fall within the confidence interval as that would mean that there is <5% 
chance of there being no association. The RR values above 1 indicate that the factor that is 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 37 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
being studied is associated with an increased incidence of the condition being studied, while 
values below 1 indicate that the opposite. In order for either of those conclusions to be reached, 
the entirety of the confidence interval must fall on the same side of the value 1. 
68. A clinical study was done to assess the response to a novel calcium channel blocker in patients 
with essential hypertension. The drug was compared to amlodipine and it was found that on 
average it reduced the blood pressure by 2.3 mmHg more than amlodipine (95% confidence 
interval: 0.9-2.6 mmHg). Despite the findings, the drug has not replaced amlodipine as the 
preferred treatment. Which of the following explains the likely rationale behind such decision: 
a) the results are not statistically significant 
b) the results are statistically but not clinically significant 
c) the study has not addressed enough parameters to be relevant 
d) the drug needs to undergo more phases of a clinical trial 
e) the decision not to replace amlodipine was wrong 
The correct answer is b. 
It is important to understand the difference between clinical and statistical significance. In this 
case, the confidence interval does not contain the value 0. Therefore, the results have reached 
statistical significance and the new drug does reduce blood pressure more than amlodipine. 
However, the blood pressure decrease of 2.3 mmHg is unlikely to lead to clinically improved 
outcomes. This drug has already undergone the third phase of clinical trial (comparison with 
current standard of care). The next step would be the release the drug to the market. 
69. A 75-year-old female smoker with significant family history of lung cancer (patient A) and a 
healthy 25-year-old female non-smoker with no family history of lung cancer (patient B) 
undergo CT scans of the chest. Which of the following best represents the correct comparison 
of using the test for diagnosing lung cancer in these two patients: 
a) the sensitivity of the test is higher for patient A 
b) the specificity of the test is higher for patient A 
c) the positive predictive value is higher for patient A 
d) all of the above is higher for patient A 
e) none of the above is higher for patient A 
The correct answer is c. 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 38 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
Sensitivity and specificity are integral features of a diagnostic test and they do not depend on 
any external variables. Sensitivity is the likelihood that a person affected by a condition tests 
positive, while specificity is the likelihood that a healthy person tests negative. Positive and 
negative predictive values, on the other hand, do depend on external variables, such as disease 
prevalence in a certain population. Prevalence of lung cancer is much higher among 75-year-old 
smokers with family history of lung cancer than it is among 25-year-old non-smokers with no 
such family history. Therefore, the positive predictive value of the test is higher in patient A. 
70. A group of researchers is trying to assess the relationship between exposure to second-hand 
tobacco and abdominal aortic aneurysm development. Their ultimate goal is to determine the 
relative risk of abdominal aortic aneurysm development in people exposed to significant 
amounts of second-hand smoke compared to those unexposed. They want to present the results 
at the conference in six months. Which of the following types of study would be best suited to 
their needs: 
a) cross-sectional study 
b) case-control study 
c) retrospective cohort study 
d) prospective cohort study 
e) clinical trial 
The correct answer is c. 
Cohort studies are used to determine the relative risk of developing a condition based on 
exposure to a risk factor. Considering the time limitation, a retrospective cohort study makes 
more sense as prospective cohort studies take a long time to complete. Clinical trials require an 
active intervention, which, in this case, would be unethical. Case-control studies determine the 
odds of exposure in affected versus unaffected individuals. Cross-sectional studies determine 
the frequency of the disease and the risk factor. 
71. A study is done to assess the relationship between smoking and congestive heart failure (CHF) 
development. At the end of the study, it is determined that the risk of CHF development is 5% 
in non-smokers and 15% in smokers. Which of the following is the attributable risk of smoking 
to CHF development: 
a) 5% 
b) 10% 
c) 15% 
d) 20% 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 39 
e) 300% 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
The correct answer is b. 
Attributable risk is the difference in risk between the 2 groups that are being studied. In this 
case it is 15%-5%=10%. 
72. Three similarly priced, inexpensive tests were developed to evaluate for breast cancer in 
women. The sensitivity (Se) and specificity (Sp) of each test are given below. Which of the 
following testing strategies is the most appropriate: 
Test 1: Se 89% Sp 96% 
Test 2: Se 60% Sp 99% 
Test 3: Se 98% Sp 72% 
a) Test 3 followed by test 2 if test 3 is positive 
b) Test 2 followed by test 3 if test 2 is positive 
c) Test 1 followed by test 2 if test 1 is positive 
d) Test 1 only 
e) Test 3 followed by test 1 if test 3 is positive 
The correct answer is a. 
The appropriate order of tests is from more sensitive to more specific tests. Sensitive tests have 
very low rates of false negatives, whereas specific tests have low rates of false positives. That is 
why sensitive tests are good for screening, while specific tests are used for confirmation. In this 
case, test 3 is the most sensitive and should, therefore, be done first. Test 2 is the most specific 
and is the best test to confirm the diagnosis. If only one test could be performed, then using test 
1 could be a reasonable alternative. 
73. A study is done to assess blood pressure control among patients treated with thiazide diuretics. 
At the end of the study it is discovered that the device being used was not functioning properly. 
Which of the following correctly identifies the resulting bias in the study: 
a) procedure bias 
b) confounding bias 
c) observer bias 
d) measurement bias 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 40 
e) length-time bias 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
The correct answer is d. 
Measurement bias occurs when faulty equipment leads to incorrect readings and therefore 
biased study results. Procedure bias occurs when participants are not treated equally. 
Confounders are external variables related to both factors that are being studied that may lead to 
incorrect conclusions about study results. Observer bias occurs when the researcher’s strong 
belief in the existence or non-existence of the association being study leads to incorrect 
interpretation of the study results. Length-time bias refers to the tendency of screening tests to 
better identify diseases with longer latency periods. 
74. There are currently 4,000 people suffering from multiple sclerosis in a city with the population 
of 1 million people. 300 new cases are diagnosed each year and 40 deaths can be attributed to 
multiple sclerosis. In total, approximately 10,000 people die in that city every year. Which of 
the following represents the prevalence of multiple sclerosis: 
a) 300/1,000,000 
b) 4,000/1,000,000 
c) 40/1,000,000 
d) 300/996,000 
e) 4,000/996,000 
The correct answer is b. 
Prevalence of a disease is the number of people affected by a condition divided by the total 
population. In this case, the prevalence is 4,000/1,000,000. Incidence is the number of new 
cases divided by the population at risk (so it does not include people already affected). In this 
case, it is 300/996,000. The disease-specific mortality is the number of deaths that can be 
attributed to the disease divided by the total population. In this case, it is 40/1,000,000. 
75. Which of the following represents the incidence of multiple sclerosis: 
a) 300/1,000,000 
b) 4,000/1,000,000 
c) 40/1,000,000 
d) 300/996,000 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 41 
e) 4,000/996,000 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
The correct answer is d. 
Incidence is the number of new cases divided by the population at risk (so it does not include 
people already affected). In this case, it is 300/996,000. Prevalence of a disease is the number of 
people affected by a condition divided by the total population. In this case, the prevalence is 
4,000/1,000,000. The disease-specific mortality is the number of deaths that can be attributed to 
the disease divided by the total population. In this case, it is 40/1,000,000. 
76. Which of the following represents the disease-specific mortality of multiple sclerosis: 
a) 300/1,000,000 
b) 4,000/1,000,000 
c) 40/1,000,000 
d) 300/996,000 
e) 4,000/996,000 
The correct answer is c. 
In this case, the prevalence is 4,000/1,000,000. The disease-specific mortality is the number of 
deaths that can be attributed to the disease divided by the total population. In this case, it is 
40/1,000,000. Incidence is the number of new cases divided by the population at risk (so it does 
not include people already affected). In this case, it is 300/996,000. Prevalence of a disease is 
the number of people affected by a condition divided by the total population. 
77. Researchers are doing a study to assess the relationship between age and type II diabetes 
mellitus. They divided the population into three different age groups: under 40, between 40 and 
60 and over 60 years old. The percentages of people in each age group who have elevated 
fasting blood sugar levels will be compared. Which of the following statistical tests would be 
best suited to this type of study: 
a) ANOVA 
b) Fisher’s exact test 
c) Meta-analysis 
d) t-test 
e) Chi-square test 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 42 
The correct answer is e. 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
Chi-square test is used to compare the differences between 2 or more percentages or 
proportions of categorical outcomes. It is not used to compare mean values. t-test and ANOVA 
test check the differences between means of groups. Fisher’s exact test checks differences 
between 2 percentages or proportions of categorical outcomes. Meta-analysis is a type of study 
where researchers pool data from multiple studies for a more precise estimate of the true effect. 
78. A group of researchers is trying to determine the prevalence of a disease in the population. 
Which of the following study types best matches their goal: 
a) clinical trial 
b) cohort study 
c) meta-analysis 
d) cross-sectional 
e) case-control 
The correct answer is d. 
Cross-sectional studies are done to determine the prevalence of a disease in the population. As 
such, they do not establish causality. Case-control studies are done to calculate the odds ratio of 
exposure to a risk factor between people affected by a condition and those who are unaffected. 
Cohort studies are done to determine the relative risk of developing a condition depending on 
the exposure to a risk factor. Clinical trials involve active interventions and are done to compare  
the tested treatment to either the placebo or the current standard of care. Meta-analysis is a type 
of study done by pooling the data from previously done studies in order to improve the power 
and generalizability of the findings. 
79. A clinical study is done to assess the efficacy of a new diagnostic test for lung adenocarcinoma. 
The results are then compared to the results of a biopsy, the gold standard diagnostic test. The 
number of true positives was 150, the number of false positives was 20, the number of true 
negatives 130 and the number of false negatives 50. A 65-year-old patient with a 5 week history 
of dry cough undergoes the test and it comes back positive. Which of the following represents 
the probability that the patient has lung adenocarcinoma: 
a) 150/170 
b) 150/200 
c) 130/150 
d) 130/180 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 43 
e) 200/350 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
The correct answer is a. 
The positive predictive value represents the likelihood that the person who tests positive for a 
disease is actually affected. It is calculated as: TP/(TP+FP). The negative predictive value 
represents the likelihood that the person who tests negative is unaffected. It is calculated as: 
TN/(TN+FN). Sensitivity is the proportion of people affected who test positive and is calculated 
as: TP/(TP+FN). Specificity is the proportion of unaffected people who test negative and is 
calculated as: TN/(TN+FP). Prevalence is calculated as (TP+FN)/(TP+FN+FP+TN). It is not 
the true prevalence of the disease in the population (as it would require random selection of 
subjects from the population - which would be impractical for the purposes of the study as the 
total prevalence of lung adenocarcinoma is low and the number of participants would have to be 
much higher). 
80. Which of the following represents the likelihood that a person who tests negative does not have 
lung adenocarcinoma: 
a) 150/170 
b) 150/200 
c) 130/150 
d) 130/180 
e) 200/350 
The correct answer is d. 
The negative predictive value represents the likelihood that the person who tests negative is 
unaffected. The positive predictive value represents the likelihood that the person who tests 
positive for a disease is actually affected. Specificity is the proportion of unaffected people who 
test negative and is calculated as: TN/(TN+FP). Sensitivity is the proportion of people affected 
who test positive and is calculated as: TP/(TP+FN). Prevalence is calculated as 
(TP+FN)/(TP+FN+FP+TN). It is not the true prevalence of the disease in the population (as it 
would require random selection of subjects from the population - which would be impractical 
for the purposes of the study as the total prevalence of lung adenocarcinoma is low and the 
number of participants would have to be much higher). 
81. Which of the following represents the probability of an unaffected person testing negative: 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 44 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
a) 150/170 
b) 150/200 
c) 130/150 
d) 130/180 
e) 200/350 
The correct answer is c. 
Specificity is the proportion of unaffected people who test negative and is calculated as: 
TN/(TN+FP). Sensitivity is the proportion of people affected who test positive and is calculated 
as: TP/(TP+FN). The positive predictive value represents the likelihood that the person who 
tests positive for a disease is actually affected. It is calculated as: TP/(TP+FP). The negative 
predictive value represents the likelihood that the person who tests negative is unaffected. It is 
calculated as: TN/(TN+FN). Prevalence is calculated as (TP+FN)/(TP+FN+FP+TN). It is not 
the true prevalence of the disease in the population (as it would require random selection of 
subjects from the population - which would be impractical for the purposes of the study as the 
total prevalence of lung adenocarcinoma is low and the number of participants would have to be 
much higher). 
82. Which of the following represents the probability of an affected person testing positive: 
a) 150/170 
b) 150/200 
c) 130/150 
d) 130/180 
e) 200/350 
The correct answer is b. 
Sensitivity is the proportion of people affected who test positive and is calculated as: 
TP/(TP+FN). Specificity is the proportion of unaffected people who test negative and is 
calculated as: TN/(TN+FP).  The positive predictive value represents the likelihood that the 
person who tests positive for a disease is actually affected. It is calculated as: TP/(TP+FP). The 
negative predictive value represents the likelihood that the person who tests negative is 
unaffected. It is calculated as: TN/(TN+FN). Prevalence is calculated as 
(TP+FN)/(TP+FN+FP+TN). It is not the true prevalence of the disease in the population (as it 
would require random selection of subjects from the population - which would be impractical 
for the purposes of the study as the total prevalence of lung adenocarcinoma is low and the 
number of participants would have to be much higher). 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 45 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
83. A screening mammography is performed on 2000 women in women older than 50 years. 50 of 
them are found to have breast cancer. Which of the following best describes the annual 
incidence and prevalence of breast cancer in this population: 
a) incidence cannot be determined, prevalence 2.5% 
b) incidence 2.5%, prevalence cannot be determined 
c) incidence 2.5%, prevalence 2.5% 
d) neither incidence nor prevalence can be determined 
e) incidence 0.25%, prevalence 2.5% 
The correct answer is a. 
Incidence refers to the ratio of the number of newly diagnosed cases in a year and the total 
number of people at risk. Prevalence is the ratio of the number of people affected by the 
condition and the total number of people in the population. Prevalence of the disease is 
therefore 2.5% (50 out of 2000). Incidence cannot be determined from the data given. 
84. A medical student is interested in the perception of pain experienced by patients suffering from 
osteoarthritis. She surveyed 100 patients affected by osteoarthritis. There were 10 questions in 
the questionnaire, each asking participants to grade their pain from 1-10 at a certain time of the 
day. The final score was a sum of the 10 pain scores that were reported. 98 of the 100 patients 
ended the study with final scores between 20 and 50. 2 of the patients had the score of 100. 
Which of the measures of central tendency is the most affected by these two patients: 
a) median 
b) mean 
c) mode 
d) they are all affected equally 
e) none of them are affected 
The correct answer is b. 
Extremely high or low values affect the mean the most as the mean is calculated as the sum of 
all the values divided by the number of measurements. Median is affected less as it represents 
the value that has an equal number of measurements that fall below and above it. Mode is 
affected the least as it represents the most frequently reported value. 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 46 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
85. Which of the measures of central tendency is the least affected by these two patients: 
a) median 
b) mean 
c) mode 
d) they are all affected equally 
e) none of them are affected 
The correct answer is c. 
Mode is affected the least as it represents the most frequently reported value. Only two patients 
reported the values of 100, everyone else fell between 20 and 50. With 98 values falling 
between 20 and 50, 100 cannot become the mode and the mode is, therefore, unchanged. 
Extremely high or low values affect the mean the most as the mean is calculated as the sum of 
all the values divided by the number of measurements. Median is affected less as it represents 
the value that has an equal number of measurements that fall below and above it. 
86. A new biomarker for severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) has been 
developed. The lower the value of the marker, the higher the probability the patient is affected 
by COPD. Upon further investigation, it is discovered that it follows a normal distribution. 
Approximately 2.5% of the target population is affected by severe COPD. Which of the 
following represents the correct cut-off value for severe COPD in this circumstance: 
a) 1 SD below the mean 
b) 1 SD above the mean 
c) 2 SD above the mean 
d) 2 SD below the mean 
e) 3 SD below the mean 
The correct answer is d. 
68% of measurements fall within 1 SD of the mean when the distribution of values is normal. 
That means that approximately 16% of measurements fall both above and below 1 SD of the 
mean. 95% of measurements fall within 2 SD’s of the mean. Therefore, 2.5% fall under 2 SD’s 
below the mean. 99.7% of measurements fall within 3 SD’s of the mean. 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 47 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
87. An epidemiology graduate student is following the recent trends in disease prevalence and 
incidence. He is noticing that in recent years there has been a significant increase in prevalence 
of cystic fibrosis. Which of the following best explains the phenomenon: 
a) increased incidence due to increased gene prevalence in the population 
b) decreased incidence due to infertility of gene carriers 
c) increased mortality due to resistant infections 
d) lead-time bias 
e) improved survival due to better management options 
The correct answer is e. 
With improved management the prevalence of the disease increases while the incidence 
remains relatively stable. The management of cystic fibrosis is improving significantly and 
most patients nowadays reach adulthood and more and more are reaching the age of 50. Cystic 
fibrosis is usually diagnosed shortly after birth so lead-time bias is not an important factor. 
88. Researchers are designing a study to assess whether individuals diagnosed with multiple 
sclerosis were more likely to have a history of cigarette smoke exposure. Which of the 
following types of studies best fits that objective: 
a) retrospective cohort study 
b) prospective cohort study 
c) case-control study 
d) cross-sectional study 
e) clinical trial 
The correct answer is c. 
Case-control studies are best suited to determine the odds of exposure to a risk factor in affected 
and unaffected individuals. Cohort studies are best suited to determining the risk of disease 
development in exposed individuals compared to the unexposed. Cross-sectional studies are 
done to determine prevalence of the disease. Clinical trials involve an active intervention. 
89. A researcher is doing a meta-analysis to assess the relationship between alcohol use and liver 
cirrhosis. At the end of the study period his results vary significantly from those widely 
accepted. Which of the following is a possible explanation of the discrepancy: 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 48 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
a) the relationship between alcohol use and liver cirrhosis has changed recently 
b) the previously accepted theories could be wrong 
c) there may be more than one association between the variables 
d) the researcher used low-quality studies for his meta-analysis 
e) the power of meta-analysis is often low 
The correct answer is d. 
The quality of the meta-analysis depends on the quality of the individual studies being used. If 
the studies that are chosen are biased or have other systemic problems, the findings in the meta
analysis will also be affected. The relationship between alcohol and liver disease does not 
change over time. Considering how deeply the relationship has been studied in the past, it is 
also extremely unlikely that all the previous findings were wrong. One of the main advantages 
of meta-analyses over any other types of clinical research is that their power tends to be much 
higher as they pool data (and subjects) from a number of different studies. 
90. A group of researchers is evaluating the usefulness of plain chest X-Rays in diagnosis lung 
cancer. They evaluate any shadows based on pre-set criteria. Shadows larger than 2 cm in 
diameter are referred for further scanning. Which of the following best describes what the effect 
on findings would be if the cut-off value increased to 3 cm: 
a) the number of false positives would not change 
b) the number of false positives would increase 
c) the number of false negatives would not change 
d) the number of false negatives would increase 
e) the precision of the study would increase 
The correct answer is d. 
Larger lesions are more likely to be malignant. Increasing the cut-off value to 3 cm, would 
likely result in a higher number of false negatives as any cancers that are between 2 and 3 cm in 
size would be missed. The number of false positives would likely decrease as fewer smaller 
(and therefore more likely to be benign) lesions would be referred for further testing. Precision 
refers to how close test results are to one another. 
91. Which of the following best describes what effect such change would have on sensitivity and 
specificity of the test: 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 49 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
a) specificity would increase 
b) sensitivity would increase 
c) specificity would not change 
d) sensitivity would not change 
e) incidence would decrease 
The correct answer is a. 
Increasing the cut-off value means that for those who test positive, the likelihood of the lesion 
being malignant would be higher. Sensitivity would decrease as a number of affected patients 
with lesions between 2 and 3 cm in size would be missed. The way a test result is interpreted 
has no bearing on the incidence of the disease. A way to decrease incidence would be to 
decrease public exposure to risk factors (eg, smoking cessation programs). 
92. A group of researchers is looking into the incidence of ulcerative colitis by age. Which of the 
following best describes the distribution curve they would most likely see: 
a) normal distribution 
b) bimodal distribution 
c) trimodal distribution 
d) positively skewed distribution 
e) negatively skewed distribution 
The correct answer is b. 
Ulcerative colitis has two distinctive peak as far as age distribution goes. It tends to occur either 
in young adults or in the elderly. Relatively few people develop ulcerative colitis in the middle 
age. Positively skewed distributions are the ones where mean is larger than the median, which is 
larger than the mode. Negatively skewed distributions are the opposite. Trimodal distributions 
would have three peaks. Normal distribution has a single peak with mean, mode and median 
being the same. 
93. A new coronavirus COVID-19 has affected the total of 10,000 people in a population of 
100,000. At the end of the epidemic, it was found that on average, 150 new cases were 
diagnosed every day. The number of people who died from the disease was 100. Which of the 
following is the case fatality rate of the COVID-19 infection in this population: 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 50 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
a) 10% 
b) 1% 
c) 1.5% 
d) 15% 
e) 5% 
The correct answer is b. 
Case fatality rate is the percentage of people affected who end up dying from the disease. In this 
case, of the 10,000 people affected, 100 died. That gives the case fatality rate of 1%. Incidence 
refers to the number of new cases among the number of people at risk, while the prevalence 
refers to the total number of people affected divided by the total population. 
94. A 58-year-old male undergoes colorectal cancer screening with fecal occult blood test. He is 
relieved to find out that the results of the test are negative, although he worries that they may be 
false negative as multiple of his family members have suffered from the disease. He is 
concerned that the relatively low prevalence of the disease in the population affects the results 
of the test. Which of the following statements is true in regards to that: 
a) the low prevalence of the disease increases the sensitivity of the test 
b) the low prevalence of the disease decreases the sensitivity of the test 
c) the low prevalence of the disease does not affect the sensitivity of the test 
d) the low prevalence of the disease does not affect the negative predictive value of the test 
e) the low prevalence of the disease decreases the negative predictive value of the test 
The correct answer is c. 
Sensitivity and specificity are inherent properties of a diagnostic test and they do not depend on 
the prevalence of the disease in population. Sensitivity of the test is the probability that a person 
affected by a condition tests positive. In an ideal scenario, a sensitivity of 100% would indicate 
that everyone affected by a condition would get a positive test result. Positive and negative 
predictive value of the test, on the other hand, do depend on the prevalence of the disease in 
question. They indicate what the likelihood is that someone who tests positive or negative, 
respectively, is or is not affected by the condition, respectively. For diseases with relatively low 
prevalence, the negative predictive value of a test is high, meaning that people who test 
negative are very likely not to be have the disease. 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 51 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
95. Which of the following would change if the disease in question affected a significantly larger 
percentage of the population: 
a) the negative predictive value would increase 
b) the negative predictive value would not change 
c) the sensitivity would increase 
d) the positive predictive value would increase 
e) the specificity would increase 
The correct answer is d. 
Increasing the prevalence of the disease would increase the positive predictive value of the test. 
The positive predictive value refers to the probability that a person who tests positive is affected 
by the condition. The more prevalent the disease is the more likely everyone is to have it, 
regardless of the way they test. The effect on the negative predictive value would be the 
opposite. Sensitivity and specificity would not change as they are inherent properties of the test. 
96. In general, which of the following increases the sensitivity of a test: 
a) increased prevalence of the disease 
b) decreased incidence of the disease 
c) increased number of tests performed 
d) narrowing the definition of a positive result 
e) widening the definition of a positive result 
The correct answer is e. 
Widening the definition of a positive result for further testing increases the number of people 
who test positive. Sensitivity of the test refers to the probability that a person affected by a 
condition would get a positive test result. In an ideal scenario, everyone with a condition would 
get a positive test result, indicating the sensitivity of 100%. However, in practice, there will be 
values which are extraordinarily infrequent among people affected by the condition and further 
testing in that group would result in extremely high false positive rates. It would, however, 
increase the sensitivity of the test as more people affected by the condition would test positive. 
Prevalence, incidence and the number of tests that are performed do not affect the sensitivity of 
the test. 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 52 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
97. In a survey of 200 households with the average of 3 residents per household, 150 individuals 
with hypertension are detected. Which of the following is the best estimate of the prevalence of 
hypertension in this population: 
a) 15% 
b) 25% 
c) 33% 
d) 67% 
e) 75% 
The correct answer is b. 
The total of 600 people were surveyed (200 households * 3 residents). 150 of them were found 
to be hypertensive. The prevalence of the disease is calculated as the number of people affected 
by a condition divided by the total number of people at risk. 150/600 = 0.25 = 25%. 
98. A group of researchers is studying the association between radiation exposure and acute 
myeloid leukemia (AML) development. They have identified a group of patients with AML and 
a similar group of patients without AML. History of radiation exposure is obtained from both 
groups. Which of the following best describes such a study: 
a) case-control 
b) cross-sectional 
c) randomized clinical trial 
d) prospective cohort 
e) retrospective cohort 
The correct answer is a. 
Case-control studies assess the odds ratio of exposure to a risk factor between the group 
exposed to a risk factor and a similar group unexposed to the same risk factor. Controls have to 
be similar to cases in their baseline characteristics. Cross-sectional studies are done to assess 
prevalence of a disease. Randomized clinical trials involve an active intervention. Cohort 
studies are also done by identifying a group exposed to a risk factor and a group unexposed to 
the same factor. The two groups are then followed for a period of time for the development of 
an effect. In retrospective cohort studies the start date is in the past. 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 53 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
99. Researchers have developed a new diagnostic test for the COVID-19 infection. The sensitivity 
of the test is reported to be 65% and the specificity is 95%. The test was performed on 100 
patients affected by COVID-19 and 100 patients who are unaffected. Which of the following is 
the number of false negative test results: 
a) 5 
b) 35 
c) 50 
d) 65 
e) 95 
The correct answer is b. 
The sensitivity of the test is calculated as TP/(TP+FN). The specificity is calculated as 
TN/(TN+FP). The number of people who have the disease is TP+FN. The number of people 
who do not have the disease is TN+FP. The positive predictive value is calculated as 
TP/(TP+FP). The negative predictive value is calculated as TN/(TN+FN) 
TP/(TP+FN) = 0.65 => TP/100 = 0.65 => TP = 65 => FN = 100 - 65 = 35 
TN/(TN+FP) = 0.95 => TN/100 = 0.95 => TN = 95 => FP = 100 - 95 = 5 
PPV = TP/(TP+FP) = 65/(65+5) = 65/70 = 93% 
NPV = TN/(TN+FN) = 95/(95+35) = 95/130 = 73% 
100. Which of the following is the number of false positive test results: 
a) 5 
b) 35 
c) 50 
d) 65 
e) 95 
The correct answer is a. 
The sensitivity of the test is calculated as TP/(TP+FN). The specificity is calculated as 
TN/(TN+FP). The number of people who have the disease is TP+FN. The number of people 
who do not have the disease is TN+FP. The positive predictive value is calculated as 
TP/(TP+FP). The negative predictive value is calculated as TN/(TN+FN) 
TP/(TP+FN) = 0.65 => TP/100 = 0.65 => TP = 65 => FN = 100 - 65 = 35 
TN/(TN+FP) = 0.95 => TN/100 = 0.95 => TN = 95 => FP = 100 - 95 = 5 
PPV = TP/(TP+FP) = 65/(65+5) = 65/70 = 93% 
NPV = TN/(TN+FN) = 95/(95+35) = 95/130 = 73% 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 54 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
101. Which of the following is the positive predictive value of the test: 
a) 35% 
b) 65% 
c) 73% 
d) 93% 
e) 95% 
The correct answer is d. 
The sensitivity of the test is calculated as TP/(TP+FN). The specificity is calculated as 
TN/(TN+FP). The number of people who have the disease is TP+FN. The number of people 
who do not have the disease is TN+FP. The positive predictive value is calculated as 
TP/(TP+FP). The negative predictive value is calculated as TN/(TN+FN) 
TP/(TP+FN) = 0.65 => TP/100 = 0.65 => TP = 65 => FN = 100 - 65 = 35 
TN/(TN+FP) = 0.95 => TN/100 = 0.95 => TN = 95 => FP = 100 - 95 = 5 
PPV = TP/(TP+FP) = 65/(65+5) = 65/70 = 93% 
NPV = TN/(TN+FN) = 95/(95+35) = 95/130 = 73% 
102. Which of the following is the negative predictive value of the test: 
a) 35% 
b) 65% 
c) 73% 
d) 93% 
e) 95% 
The correct answer is c. 
The sensitivity of the test is calculated as TP/(TP+FN). The specificity is calculated as 
TN/(TN+FP). The number of people who have the disease is TP+FN. The number of people 
who do not have the disease is TN+FP. The positive predictive value is calculated as 
TP/(TP+FP). The negative predictive value is calculated as TN/(TN+FN) 
TP/(TP+FN) = 0.65 => TP/100 = 0.65 => TP = 65 => FN = 100 - 65 = 35 
TN/(TN+FP) = 0.95 => TN/100 = 0.95 => TN = 95 => FP = 100 - 95 = 5 
PPV = TP/(TP+FP) = 65/(65+5) = 65/70 = 93% 
NPV = TN/(TN+FN) = 95/(95+35) = 95/130 = 73% 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 55 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
103. Which of the following would increase the positive predictive value of the test: 
a) better treatment of the disease 
b) improved patient isolation 
c) patients refusing to self-isolate 
d) vaccine development 
e) increased number of ICU beds 
The correct answer is c. 
Increased prevalence of the disease leads to increased positive predictive value of the tests 
because people in general are more likely to be affected by the condition regardless of the way 
they test. None of the other answer choices would significantly increase the prevalence of the 
disease. 
104. A retrospective cohort trial was done to assess the relationship between long-term aspirin 
use and colorectal carcinoma development. The reported relative risk was 0.82 with the 95% 
confidence interval 0.76 to 0.96. Which of the following ‘p’ values best correlates with those 
findings: 
a) 0.03 
b) 0.07 
c) 0.1 
d) 0.5 
e) 1.0 
The correct answer is a. 
The relative risk determines the risk of disease development in the exposed group versus that in 
the unexposed group. Values lower than 1 indicate that the factor being studied is protective. If 
the value is 1, it indicates that there is no statistically significant association between the 
variables being studied. The 95% confidence must not contain the value 1 in order for results to 
be statistically significant. When the confidence interval does not contain the value 1, it 
corresponds to the p value less than 0.05. 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 56 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
105. The same trial was done simultaneously at a different center. They found the relative risk to 
be 0.87 with the 95% confidence interval 0.70 to 1.15. They also reported that they lost a 
significant percentage of the population to follow-up, mostly among those who were not taking 
aspirin. Which of the following biases is most likely affecting their results: 
a) recall bias 
b) observer bias 
c) lead-time bias 
d) selection bias 
e) length-time bias 
The correct answer is d. 
Attrition bias is a form of selection bias. It occurs when a large number of participants are lost 
to follow up and the majority of them are from the same group, altering the findings in the 
study. In this study, it is possible that the uneven attrition of participants led to the loss of 
statistical significance of the findings. Recall bias occurs due to tendency of people to 
overreport exposures once the disease develops. Observer bias occurs when the researcher’s 
strong belief in the existence or non-existence of an association affects the way the data is 
analyzed. Lead-time bias refers to the appearance of improved survival due to earlier detection 
of disease without actually altering its course. Length-time bias refers to the tendency of 
screening tests to diagnose diseases with longer latency periods. 
106. The investigators are looking into the average fasting blood glucose levels among patients in 
a primary care clinic. The clinic takes care of 1000 patients and it was found that fasting blood 
glucose levels were normally distributed with a mean of 90 mg/dL and standard deviation of 10 
mg/dL. Which of the following represents the number of patients who have blood glucose 
levels >110 mg/dL: 
a) 2 
b) 10 
c) 25 
d) 50 
e) 160 
The correct answer is c. 
With the mean of 90 and SD of 10, the values above 110 mg/dL represent > 2 SDs above the 
mean. Approximately 95% of patients have values within 2 SDs of the mean. That means that 
approximately 2.5% of patients will have values that are either above or below 2 SDs of the 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 57 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
mean. 2.5% of 1000 participants is 25 participants. Roughly 68% of the population will have 
values within 1 SD of the mean, meaning that 16% (or 160 patients) will have values above 1 
SD of the mean (100 mg/dL). Between 1 and 2 patients will have values above 120 mg/dL (3 
SDs above the mean). 
107. A large clinical trial was done to assess the efficacy of the new diabetes drug. In the first 
phase of the trial, several volunteers were given the drug and no serious side effects were seen. 
Which of the following was likely assessed during this phase of the trial: 
a) efficacy 
b) dosing 
c) comparison with standard of care 
d) pharmacokinetics 
e) black box warnings 
The correct answer is d. 
Safety, toxicity, pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics are assessed in the first phase of 
clinical trials, when the drug is typically given to a smaller number of volunteers. In the second 
phase, the drug is given to a larger number of patients and the efficacy, dosing, and adverse 
effects are assessed. After that, in phase III it is compared to placebo or the current standard of 
care. Finally, once the drug is released to the market it is still followed for years to assess for 
rare or long-term adverse effects (eg, black box warnings). 
108. Which of the following would most likely be assessed in the next phase of the trial if the 
drug successfully passes this phase: 
a) comparison with standard of care 
b) dosing 
c) pharmacokinetics 
d) pharmacodynamics 
e) black box warnings 
The correct answer is b. 
In the second phase, the drug is given to a larger number of patients and the efficacy, dosing, 
and adverse effects are assessed. After that, in phase III it is compared to placebo or the current 
standard of care. Finally, once the drug is released to the market it is still followed for years to 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 58 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 
assess for rare or long-term adverse effects (eg, black box warnings). Pharmacokinetics and 
pharmacodynamics are assessed in the first phase of the clinical trial. 
109. A group of public health officials is looking into developing the new screening program for 
aggressive prostate cancer. Which of the following features of the test would make it most 
appropriate as the screening test of choice: 
a) sensitivity 65%, specificity 95% 
b) sensitivity 85%, specificity 85% 
c) sensitivity 75%, specificity 35% 
d) sensitivity 95%, specificity 30% 
e) sensitivity 35%, specificity 90% 
The correct answer is d. 
The purpose of screening is to identify as many people as possible who have the disease, even 
at the expense of getting a larger number of false positive results. The number of false negatives 
needs to remain low. Those are the features of a highly sensitive test. In this case, test d is the 
most sensitive and, therefore, the best for screening. Following a positive screening test, a 
confirmatory, highly specific test can be done to definitively diagnose the condition. In this 
case, the most specific test is test a. 
110. Which of the tests would be the most appropriate confirmatory test: 
a) sensitivity 65%, specificity 95% 
b) sensitivity 85%, specificity 85% 
c) sensitivity 75%, specificity 35% 
d) sensitivity 95%, specificity 30% 
e) sensitivity 35%, specificity 90% 
The correct answer is a. 
Confirmatory tests need to be highly specific, meaning that they correctly identify people who 
do not have the condition in question. The number of false positives needs to remain low (vs 
number of false negatives that needs to remain low in screening tests). In this case, the most 
specific test is test a. 
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM 59 